JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: And
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight, relentless
devastation in Louisiana.
Homeland Security Secretary Jeh
Johnson visits
the battered state as flooding
continues and
the death toll rises.
SREENIVASAN: Also ahead this
Thursday, a look
at changing battleground states.
How Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump are redrawing
the political map.
WOODRUFF: And, powerful images
coming out
of the war-ravaged Syrian city
of Aleppo spark
outrage, but can attention
online lead to
real change?
SREENIVASAN: Plus, how two Wall
Street businessmen
gave up a life of luxury to
tackle inequality
and help those struggling to
find healthy,
affordable food.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I thought
there was something
out there in the world, a bigger
problem that
need solving, beyond being
another person
working in the private equity
industry.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: All that and more on
tonight's PBS
"NewsHour".
(BREAK)
SREENIVASAN: A
fast-moving inferno burning 60
miles east
of Los Angeles flared even more
today.
Some 1,500 firefighters are
battling the massive
wildfire that's only four
percent contained.
They dropped fire retardant on
parts of the
San Gabriel Mountains to help
control the
blaze.
It's already charred more than
49 square miles
since Tuesday, 82,000 residents
have been
ordered to evacuate.
WOODRUFF: Nearly 18,000
detainees have died
in Syrian government prisons
since that country's
uprising began back in 2011.
That's according to a new report
out today
from Amnesty International.
The group interviewed abuse
survivors who
described rampant torture,
disease, and death
at the detention centers run by
Syria's intelligence
agencies.
Amnesty warned the actual death
toll is likely
much higher, since thousands of
detainees
disappeared while in custody.
SREENIVASAN: The United Nations
has admitted
for the first time to playing a
role in Haiti's
initial choler outbreak.
Some 10,000 people died, and
hundreds of thousands
more were sickened.
The disease is believed to have
spread in
2010 while U.N. peacekeeping
troops from Nepal,
where cholera is endemic, were
helping with
the relief effort after the
devastating earthquake.
A short time ago, I spoke with
journalist
Jonathan Katz live on Facebook,
who broke
this story.
He's the author of the book "The
Big truck
That Went By: How the World Came
to Save Haiti
and Left Behind a Disaster".
He's also been covering the
cholera epidemic
in Haiti.
One of our Facebook commentators
asked, "what
took the U.N. so long to admit
its role?"
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JONATHAN KATZ, JOURNALIST: The
answer is that
nobody likes admitting when
they're wrong,
especially when admitting that
you're wrong
can cost you billions of dollars
and your
job.
I think they were hoping that
this could go
away.
There was a perception at the
beginning when
cholera first broke out, again,
six years
ago, that sanitation was bad and
Haiti, Haiti's
a country that's had lots of
different kinds
of diseases in the past and
there was this
disaster that, of course, we now
know had
nothing to do with it but it was
the enormous
disaster that gotten the world's
attention
nine months before.
And I think the U.N. really felt
that it could
sort of skate by on these
expectations that
people that Haiti is just sort
of a dirty
disease place and diseases just
happened and
they thought they would get away
with it.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: You can watch my
full interview
on our "NewsHour" Facebook page.
WOODRUFF: A string off bombings
in Turkey
has killed at least 14 people
and wounded
more than 220 others.
Militants struck three separate
sites across
the south and east within hours
of each other.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan blamed
Kurdish separatists for the
attacks.
But he also accused followers of
Muslim cleric
Fethullah Gulen, who Turkey says
orchestrated
last month's failed coup.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, TURKISH
PRESIDENT (translated):
One does not need to be a
prophet to see that
Fethullah Gulen's organization
is behind the
recent attacks in terms of
information sharing
and encouragement.
Turkey is facing joint attacks
by various
terrorist organizations who act
with the same
motive.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Erdogan again demanded
the U.S.
extradite Gulen, who lives in
self-imposed
exile in Pennsylvania.
SREENIVASAN: The State
Department acknowledged
today a $400 million cash
payment the U.S.
made to Iran last January was
contingent on
the release of American
prisoners.
"The Wall Street Journal" first
reported the
two events were specifically
timed to one
another yesterday.
The money was owed to Iran in
the wake of
a failed arms deal dating back
to 1979.
Today, State Department
spokesman John Kirby
said the U.S. would not let
Tehran take control
of the cash until after the
three U.S. citizens
had left Iran.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOHN KIRBY, STATE DEPARTMENT
SPOKESMAN: We,
of course, sought to retain
maximum leverage
until after American citizens
were released.
That was our top priority.
This wasn't a case of ransom.
And again, I need to remind you
all, while
a little bit of the tick tock
here that's
driven out you might find new
and salacious
-- there's really nothing new
here in the
story about how we got those
American out
and how we leveraged
opportunities here that
were coming together at the same
time.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: Republicans have
long accused
the Obama administration of
paying ransom
for the U.S. prisoners.
They have vowed to hold hearings
on the issue
when they return from their
summer break.
WOODRUFF: The Justice Department
today announced
it will end its use of
privately- operated
prisons.
A recent report from the
department's inspector
general found that they are less
secure and
less effective compared to
federally-controlled
prisons.
The government began using the
private facilities
back in the 1990s amid a prison
overcrowding
crisis.
SREENIVASAN: Police in Brazil
now insist the
four U.S. Olympians who claimed
they were
robbed at gunpoint in Rio lied.
They allege the swimmers,
including gold medalist
Ryan Lochte, were involved in a
dispute at
a gas station after causing some
minor damage
to its bathroom.
Brazilian TV broadcast
surveillance video
that purports to show the group
being confronted
by armed security after the
incident.
One guard pulled out his gun.
Brazilian police are
recommending charges.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
FERNANDO VELOSO, CHIEF, RIO DE
JANEIRO CIVIL
POLICE (translated): In theory,
they can be
charged with giving false
testimony and vandalism,
in theory.
They stopped at the gas station,
they went
to the toilets, and one or more
than one,
we are still investigating that,
started vandalizing
inside the toilets of the gas
station.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: Police say at the
time the group
did offer to s pay for the
damage, three of
the swimmers are still in
Brazil, while Lochte
returned to the U.S. earlier
this week.
WOODRUFF: There was word today
homegrown Zika
cases have now been reported in
the popular
tourist destination of Miami
Beach, Florida.
Unnamed state health officials
told "The Miami
Herald" that a handful of cases
have been
discovered there.
The first instances of
locally-transmitted
Zika had previously been
concentrated in a
neighborhood north of downtown
Miami.
SREENIVASAN: The Clinton
Foundation will no
longer accept foreign or
corporate donations
should Hillary Clinton be
elected president.
"The Associated Press" reports
former President
Bill Clinton, who established
the non-profit
organization, briefed staffers
on the decision
today.
In the event of a Clinton
victory, it will
only accept contributions from
U.S. citizens
and independent charities.
On Wall Street today, stocks
were up slightly
after rising oil prices gave
energy shares
a boost.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average
gained more
than 23 points to close at
18,597.
The NASDAQ rose 11 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly five.
WOODRUFF: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
How Louisiana is coping with
historic floods,
why the battleground map is
changing during
this presidential election, do
images of war
have the power to affect change,
and much
more.
(BREAK)
SREENIVASAN: As Louisiana
struggles with historic
floods residents begin to
wonder, what next?
William Brangham has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
As the flood waters start to
recede, the hard
work of assessing and rebuilding
begins.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Basically, we
lost everything,
you know, other than our lives.
Couple of hours, we probably had
six-foot
of water.
Water is probably one of the
worst Mother
Nature beasts there is.
BRANGHAM: An estimated 40,000
homes were damaged
in the flooding that inundated
Baton Rouge
and Lafayette, killing at least
13 people.
Homeland Security Secretary Jeh
Johnson got
a first hand look today.
JEH JOHNSON, HOMELAND SECURITY
SECRETARY:
The federal government is here.
We have been here.
We will be here as long as it
takes to help
this community recover.
BRANGHAM: Four thousand people
are still living
in shelters across the state.
GAIL MCGOVERN, PRESIDENT AND
CEO, AMERICAN
RED CROSS: This is the largest
operation that
the American Red Cross has
responded to since
2012, Superstorm Sandy, and
driving s around
the affected area, it's really
devastating.
BRANGHAM: In the most damaged
areas, only
about one out of every eight
homes is covered
by flood insurance, because
these areas weren't
considered likely to flood.
CLEVE BROWN: No one was
expecting this.
This is, I mean, you can see, I
might have
gotten from here at it's worst
to up here.
So, that's why no one was
expecting it.
So, they're not going to have
flood insurance.
They were, you know, they
thought they were
high and dry.
BRANGHAM: More than 9,000
insurance claims
have been filed so far.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRANGHAM: For more on how
Louisiana is doing,
I'm joined now by the state's
lieutenant governor,
Billy Nungesser.
He joins us from Louisiana
Public Broadcasting
in Baton Rouge, where many of
our colleagues
there have also been flooded out
of their
homes.
Lieutenant Governor, welcome.
I wonder if you would just tell
us, how are
things today in Louisiana?
BILLY NUNGESSER, LOUISIANA LT.
GOVERNOR: Well, we're still
recovering.
We still got areas where the
water is flowing
south that will continue to have
water for
several more days, and hopefully
we can get
a break in the weather and start
to dry out.
But I heard you mention about
the flood insurance.
That's going to be an ongoing
problem because
many areas, this is an
historical flood, outside
of the flood areas, they didn't
have flood
insurance, and that's going to
be a problem
moving forward.
BRANGHAM: Well, what is going to
happen to
those people?
If you go back to your house and
it's severely
damaged or destroyed, and you
don't have insurance
to cover that, what are those
people supposed
to do?
NUNGESSER: Well, FEMA will give
up to $33,000
if you weren't in a flood zone
and had no
insurance, but the average --
that's the maximum
you can get.
The average is about $7,500.
We're going to have to make up
that difference
with volunteers and the giving
of people from
all over the country working
with nonprofits
to help make those people back
in their house
and make them whole.
A lot of elderly people that had
never flooded,
lived in a house 40 or 50 years,
didn't see
the need or couldn't afford the
flood insurance.
So, those are -- those are the
ones that we're
really concerned about.
BRANGHAM: I mean, even if people
were to get
up to $30,000, do you think
that's enough
to cover people's rebuilding,
hotels, time
off work?
NUNGESSER: Absolutely not.
That's why we're working through
volunteer
groups, United Way, Red Cross, a
lot of the
rebuilding groups that were here
after Katrina
will be coming back to help gut
those homes
and make them whole.
We had groups from all over the
country that
are already starting in
Louisiana to help
out in the rebuilding effort.
BRANGHAM: A lot of people
acknowledged the
flood maps that we use to
determine where's
the risky place to build and
where isn't,
but those maps are really
outdated.
And now, people have to start
rebuilding their
homes.
I mean, what do you tell people
if they come
to you and they say, Lieutenant
Governor,
should I be building here?
Should I build it higher?
Should I build it differently?
What do you say to people?
NUNGESSER: Well, it absolutely
should be built
higher.
And, you know, we see a lot of
these rivers
have been silted in over the
years, so there
is not as much storage capacity
in those rivers
and canals.
Plus, with sea rise and with the
coastal erosion,
even the coastal Louisiana for
hurricanes,
we're going to have to really
fast track our
coastal restoration.
But you're right.
It's the same thing that makes
Louisiana special.
It's the people that pitch in to
help rebuild.
It's a special place to live,
and that's one
of the risks of living here.
But absolutely, every one that
rebuilds, as
they did along the coast, needs
to rebuild
at a high elevation.
BRANGHAM: More broadly, are you
getting the
help you need from the federal
government
right now?
NUNGESSER: I'm really -- you
know, I have
been through five hurricanes and
the oil spill
as a parish president, and we
worked through
a lot of challenging times with
FEMA.
But the team on the ground here
in Louisiana
has been with us every day,
traveling with
the governor and addressing all
the needs,
and we've really got a great
team working
on the ground with FEMA and I
have seen great
cooperation.
We still got some challenges
ahead, but I'm
very impressed with the way
things have been
handled thus far with this
disaster, especially
being spread out over 20
parishes.
Usually, a hurricane hits one
corner of our
state and we can concentrate all
our efforts
in that area.
To deliver response with the
National Guard
and the police, volunteers,
firefighters,
at 20 parishes at one time has
really been
a massive undertaking and
they've done a great
job.
BRANGHAM: You mentioned the
importance of
having local volunteer and
charity groups
helping out.
If our viewers were interested
in trying to
lend a hand themselves, where
would you steer
them?
Where would you direct them?
NUNGESSER:
VolunteerLouisiana.gov is where
we're signing up all the
volunteers and it's
a way to check on and have your
group come
in and help, or the Red Cross is
accepting
donations.
They are manning our shelters
and will take
them over from the volunteers
this week.
The Red Cross has been a great
partner here
in Louisiana and continue to run
those shelters,
and they're going to be feeding
a lot of people.
So, we are asking for all the
help you can
give, and the country has been
very gracious
in the past.
BRANGHAM: All right.
Lieutenant Governor, thank you
for being here
and best of luck to you all down
there.
NUNGESSER: Thank you so much.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: We turn to politics
now and the
changing picture of the 2016
electoral map.
Hillary Clinton campaigned in
New York today,
while Donald Trump is in North
Carolina, a
state that's been receiving
attention from
both candidates lately.
As Lisa Desjardins reports, it
is part of
a fast, and fascinating shift in
the battleground
game.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
LISA DESJARDINS, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
Forget the words, the twists --
DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINEE: I
am the least racist person.
DESJARDINS: The turns.
HILLARY CLINTON (D),
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE:
I never sent or received any
material marked
classified.
DESJARDINS: And the endless
speculation around
this strange campaign year.
Now, the race is coming in focus
-- focus
on just a handful of states.
CLINTON: We've had an incredible
week here
in Pennsylvania.
TRUMP: I think I'm going to win
Pennsylvania
easily.
CLINTON: Thank you, Northern
Virginia!
TRUMP: We're going to be back in
Virginia
a lot.
We have to win Virginia.
DESJARDINS: And now, 2016
brought another
surprise, a fast-changing map.
These were the expected
battlegrounds earlier
this year, eleven key swing-ish
states.
But in recent weeks, five of
those -- Colorado,
Wisconsin, Michigan,
Pennsylvania and Virginia
-- have moved away from
contention in Democrats'
direction.
Polls show Hillary Clinton ahead
the by a
whopping 9 to 15 points in all
five.
She's so confident in five
states, Colorado
and Virginia that she stopped
advertising
there for now.
Instead, Team Clinton is
shifting plans, hoping
to expand their map.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), VICE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE:
We're not in North Carolina by
accident.
We're here because we're going
to win North
Carolina.
DESJARDINS: Clinton and Kaine
are going on
attack, after states that voted
for Romney
in 2012, like North Carolina and
even more
solid Republican territory like
Georgia and
Arizona.
Clinton is expanding her staff
in both states.
Those states have seen major
growth around
large cities and in their
Hispanic population,
trends that Democrats believe
favor them long
term.
And one more new and eye-popping
state of
the battleground map, Utah.
The Beehive State has voted
Republican for
almost 50 years but in a close
race, its six
electoral votes could matter.
Donald Trump said this just last
week.
TRUMP: I'm having a tremendous
problem in
Utah.
Utah's a different place, and I
don't know
if -- is anybody here from Utah?
DESJARDINS: You know who lives
in Utah, Mitt
Romney, former nominee and
outspoken Trump
critic.
MITT ROMNEY (R), FORMER
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE:
Donald Trump is a phony, a
fraud.
DESJARDINS: He reflects Mormons'
discomfort
with Trump's scrutiny of another
religious
minority, Muslims.
Trump is still competitive in
some key states
like Florida and Ohio and he's
far in front
in Indiana.
But he has two and a half months
until Election
Day to shift the rest of the map
his direction.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us now
as we dig
a little deeper into what's
going on in these
crucial battleground states.
Also joining us: Karen Kasler,
she's statehouse
bureau chief with Ohio Public
Radio and TV.
And Adam smith, he's political
editor for
Florida's "Tampa Bay Times".
He joins us from our PBS station
WEDU.
And we welcome all three of you.
Adam Smith, let me start with
you in Florida.
Right now, Hillary Clinton has a
very slightly
-- slight lead there but it's
close.
What does it feel like?
What do you see the two
candidates' strengths
and weaknesses right now?
ADAM SMITH, TAMPA BAY TIMES:
Well, Florida's
always a nail biter state.
So, it's -- the safe bet is it's
going to
be close.
It usually is.
Both candidates are here
virtually every week,
sometimes within a couple of
days of each
other.
We've had a lot of pro-Hillary
ads and some
pro-Trump ads and now, Trump is
just about
to start advertising any day
now.
WOODRUFF: Karen Kasler, what
about Ohio?
This is another state where it's
very close,
as we just heard in Lisa's
report.
What does it feel like to you
there?
KAREN KASLER, OHIO PUBLIC RADIO
AND TV: Well,
the polls are showing between
four and five
points.
Hillary Clinton is leading.
Right now, we're seeing a lot of
advertising
for Clinton.
She has been popular here in
Ohio and, in
fact, Democrats have won Ohio in
the last
two presidential elections.
But it depends on where you live
I think.
In the cities, you're seeing a
lot of Hillary
Clinton ads and offices popping
up, whereas
Trump seems to be doing a lot of
campaigning
in other areas of the state
where there aren't
urban areas.
For instance, in Youngstown,
which is right
on the border with West Virginia
and Pennsylvania,
he's done a lot of campaigning,
did his foreign
policy speech earlier this week
there.
And he's opened up 15 so-called
victory offices
in Ohio, whereas Clinton had a
leg up on that.
She has close to two dozen
offices.
So, the organizations are out
there starting
to work, but Hillary Clinton I
think has an
edge in terms of the
organization.
And right now, in the polls, she
has an edge
as well.
WOODRUFF: And, Adam, let me come
back to you
on that.
What do you see in Florida in
terms of organization,
in terms of what these two
campaigns have
going for them on the ground?
SMITH: Considerably more
organization on Clinton's
side.
She has about 20 offices -- 19
or 20 offices
open.
As of today, Donald Trump has
one headquarters
in Sarasota.
They're talking about opening up
a couple
of dozen more within the next
couple of weeks,
but that hasn't happened yet.
I think like in a lot of states,
the Trump
campaign is really all about
these big rallies.
That's sort of what Trump
himself emphasizes.
So, yes, it's true, they point
at rallies
where they draw 10,000, 15,000
people, and
suggest that shows that the
energy is on their
side.
You know, the question a lot of
Republicans
and Democrats ask is, with those
people going
after the rallies, they don't
need to be pushed
out, that a lot of people are
worried on the
Republican side that he needs to
do something
to bolster the ground game and
push people
to the polls that aren't
automatically likely
to go.
WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins, we're
talking about
two of the states where it's
competitive.
Hillary Clinton is ahead in some
of the other
battleground states.
You describe, what does Donald
Trump need
to do?
You have been talking to people
inside his
organization.
DESJARDINS: These are the two
juggernaut states
for sure, Florida and Ohio, he
absolutely
needs to win those two states
and also Pennsylvania
is considered the third leg on
that critical
stool for him.
Now, those are the three states
with the most
electoral votes.
All of them are key for that
reason.
But he can technically lose one
of them.
He's behind in Pennsylvania by
double digits
right now.
If he does (INAUDIBLE) though,
his path is
even harder.
If he loses any of the three
states like Pennsylvania,
he has to win two others
somewhere else like
Virginia and Colorado.
So, these three states have
twice the importance
as others and his path gets
smaller and smaller
as these particular states slip
away or come
toward him.
WOODRUFF: Karen Kasler, you were
saying you
see more evidence of Hillary
Clinton's organization
in Ohio.
If Donald Trump wants to catch
up in the next
80-some odd days, what does he
need to do
from the perspective of the
Republicans you're
talking to right now?
KASLER: Well, it seems like he's
got to win
over the Republicans that I'm
talking to because
as you may recall, Governor John
Kasich was
the last one man standing
against Donald Trump
in the presidential contest.
He was the last one to drop out.
He has yet to endorse Donald
Trump and has
indicated he's not going to.
He didn't go to the RNC in
Cleveland, his
home state, because of his
concerns about
Donald Trump.
There are other Republican
leaders who feel
similarly.
They're concerned about the rest
of the ticket,
including Senator Rob Portman
who is up for
election, but they are really
very worried
about Donald Trump being at the
top of the
ticket.
And so, you hear a lot of
language about I'm
going to support the nominee but
not necessarily
I'm going to campaign with
Donald Trump.
So, for Donald Trump to win, he
certainly
would have to win over some of
those people
who may not be won over-able,
and also, he
needs to win a key area of the
state, and
that's central Ohio.
And Central Ohio is really the
battleground,
I think in Ohio.
Central Ohio, the area around
Columbus where
I am is Democratic, but then the
counties
surrounding it are very
Republican.
And so, I think that's going to
be really
the area that is going to decide
the state
for the election coming up.
WOODRUFF: Adam Smith, I saw you
nodding your
heard when Karen was speaking
about Republican
officeholders in Ohio.
What about in Florida?
What kind of support does Donald
Trump have
going for him in Florida?
SMITH: Well, it just sounds so
similar to
what I hear from most Republican
officers
in Florida where they will talk
about the
nominee, they'll talk about
beating Hillary
Clinton, but most of them don't
want to utter
those two words "Donald Trump"
for whatever
reason.
The exception is our governor,
Governor Rick
Scott, unlike Kasich is a big
Trump guy.
He's leading his super PAC.
He's enthusiastic and out there
for Trump,
but Rick Scott maybe doesn't
have quite the
juice that some other people do.
He's not the most popular
governor.
WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
talking to the
Trump people, again, do you get
the sense
they are looking to other
Republicans to climb
on board?
Are they thinking they will have
to do this
on their own?
DESJARDINS: They admit they have
two very
big jobs right now.
One is to bring all the
Republicans on board.
What they talk about is how
happy they are
with Mike Pence.
They think Mike Pence is the key
to doing
that.
And we know that daily he has
been reaching
out to these --
WOODRUFF: Indiana governor.
DESJARDINS: The Indiana
governor, now the
vice presidential nominee.
The other job they have is to
expand their
base.
This is not just a Donald Trump
question.
This is a bigger question fort
Republicans
in general, and we've seen
Donald Trump start
to do that more seriously this
week as he
gave a speech talking about how
he believes
he can appeal to
African-Americans.
We need to see if that actually
moves the
dial or not.
But he's got to grow past
Republicans and
he also has to grow within
Republicans.
WOODRUFF: You and I were talking
earlier today
about the demographic challenges
the Republican
ticket faces in this election.
DESJARDINS: Right.
This is a key election to watch
not just this
year but perhaps for two or
three cycles down
the road.
Let's look at the states we talk
about that
are shifting a little bit.
Arizona on the map, Georgia on
the map, what
do those states have in common?
Some of the fastest growing
Hispanic populations
in this country.
Another problem for Republicans,
people are
moving to the cities.
They're moving away from small
towns.
I think it's one of the great
uncovered stories
right now, our small towns are
dying.
That's a problem because that's
a big part
of the Republican base, as we
get more urban.
That so far has benefited
Democrats.
WOODRUFF: Pick up on that, Karen
Kasler, and
talk also about the kind of
enthusiasm you
see for these two candidates,
for Hillary
Clinton versus Donald Trump.
How do you read that?
KASLER: Well, the rallies that
have happened
here have been pretty
enthusiastic.
Hillary Clinton was here in
Columbus just
a couple of days after accepting
the nomination
at the Democratic National
Convention.
She brought out 5,000 people in
the middle
of the heat.
Donald Trump have done several
rallies in
Ohio that have been
multi-thousand attendees.
But I want to add one other
thing in terms
of demographics -- I think in
Ohio, the Trump
voters -- the Trump campaign is
targeting
voters who are these
blue-collar, unemployed
or underemployed or frustrated
voters, people
who are in the Youngstown area,
in areas around
Toledo, in heavy manufacturing
areas, people
who are concerned about the
economy because
of trade.
We've seen the numbers of union
members who
have voted for Republicans
actually rise over
the last 20 years because of
their concerns
about trade.
So, I think that's one area the
Trump campaign
targets, when he comes to Ohio,
he's been
going to those areas.
And other than, he has been in
Columbus, but
he's going to Youngstown.
He's been going to that part of
the state
because I think he's very
interested in trying
to lure in those blue-collar and
possibly
union workers who are very
concerned.
WOODRUFF: What about that, Adam
Smith, finally
to you?
Is that -- is that a rich target
of -- an
area of opportunity for Donald
Trump in Florida?
SMITH: Well, yes, and just as
Columbus is
the swing area of Ohio, the I-4
corridor going
between Tampa Bay and Daytona
Beach, that's
our swing area here, and
particularly the
rule the rule of thumb in
Florida is whoever
wins Tampa Bay generally wins
statewide.
Trump is very strong in a lot of
Tampa Bay
where there are a lot of
independent voters,
a lot of voters that are fed up
with both
parties and we've seen some
polling for some
congressional districts and
legislative districts
in swing districts where Donald
Trump is surprisingly
strong, and he's not the drag on
the bottom
end of the ticket that in some
districts that
a lot of people have thought he
would be at
all.
WOODRUFF: So fascinating to
watch.
Adam Smith joining us from
Florida, Karen
Kasler from Ohio, our own Lisa
Desjardins
here in Washington -- we thank
you all.
SREENIVASAN: Stay with us,
coming up on the
"NewsHour": two financial
high-rollers make
a big career change to address
food deserts.
But first, the fight for life in
Aleppo, Syria,
for a badly- injured young woman
and her unborn
baby boy.
This story comes from filmmaker
Waad al-Kateab,
who tracked the quiet and
relentless efforts
to save both mother and child.
It is narrated by Matt Frei of
Independent
Television News.
A warning, this story contains
graphic images
and may upset some viewers.
MATT FREI, INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS: Everything
you're about to see happened
over 48 hours
in July in Aleppo.
On the streets outside, the
sound and fury
of war.
(SIREN WAILING)
The toll that day: 45 dead,
dozens wounded.
But inside: the reverential
concentration
of ant makeshift theater.
The woman on the operating table
is called
Maisa (ph).
She is nine months' pregnant and
she was caught
up in one of the bombings when
she was on
her way to the hospital, by
foot, close to
labor.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Let me see.
Wipe it with a swab.
Examine her hand and see if
there is shrapnel.
There isn't anything.
Give me the scalpel.
FREI: In explosion, she broke
her right arm
and leg, but what the doctors
are concerned
about most is the shrapnel in
her belly.
Did it kill her baby?
They want to perform an
emergency cesarean.
What you're witnessing is the
fight to save
one new life.
In a city that is more used to
dealing with
untimely deaths
in the operating theater, the
fight for life
appears victorious.
But there seems to be a problem.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Is his heart
beating?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: No.
No, I'm sorry.
FREI: The doctors fight on.
They're now in danger of losing
both child
and mother.
The struggle to save new life is
visceral,
instinctive, perhaps because
outside death
comes so easily.
Then the umbilical cord twitches
-- proof
of life.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: He's getting
a rosy color
now.
(BABY CRYING)
FREI: And the most elemental
sound of all.
(BABY CRYING)
FREI: More powerful for a brief
moment than
Aleppo's daily cry of death.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: It's hard not tore
be moved by
images like that, but some
pictures capture
the world's attention more than
others.
We begin with an image that
emerged last night
from the frantic attempts to
rescue people
caught in the aftermath of air
strikes.
And again, another warning: some
images in
this story may disturb some
viewers.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: Air strikes are
Aleppo's terrible
routine.
This one hit an apartment a
building in the
city's rebel-held area.
Amateur video captured the
frantic scramble
to save lives amid horror.
Then, a boy, pulled from the
rubble, sits
in an ambulance.
He's dazed, bloodied, covered in
dust.
He wipes his face.
His name: Omran Daqneesh.
Age five.
He survived without major
injuries.
So did his parents and three
young siblings.
Almost immediately, his image
swept across
social media worldwide, making
Omran the latest
symbol of heartbreak in the
now-five year
old conflict.
But do such images spark action?
If so, when?
And how?
Last year, as the refugee crisis
swelled,
one photo came to embody the
tragedy.
A drowned, three-year-old Syrian
boy, pictured
lying face down on a Turkish
beach.
It galvanized European leaders
to review how
they take in refugees and
asylum-seekers.
Other instances had less impact.
In 2012, a documentary about
Ugandan war-lord
Joseph Kony went viral.
It detailed the brutal tactics
of his "Lord's
Resistance Army," and the
group's use of child
soldiers.
With the hashtags "Kony 2012"
and "Stop Kony,"
it sparked global calls for his
arrest.
But four years later, Kony
reportedly remains
at large.
And in April 2014, the Islamist
group Boko
Haram seized more than 270 girls
from their
school in northeast Nigeria.
It led to the "Bring Back Our
Girls" campaign,
repeated and circulated by
prominent figures
like first lady Michelle Obama.
But this week, new video from
Boko Haram surfaced
showing dozens of the girls
still in captivity,
more than two years later.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: We take a closer
look at the
power of these images with Anne
Barnard, "The
New York Times" Beirut bureau
chief, and Susan
Moeller, she is a professor in
the Philip
Merrill College of Journalism at
the University
of Maryland.
She's also author of "Compassion
Fatigue:
How the Media Sell Disease,
Famine, War and
Death."
Anne, I want to start with you.
Every day on social media, there
are more
graphic, more violent pictures
of little children
than this.
What is it about this image of
the little
Omran that connected?
ANNE BARNARD, THE NEW YORK
TIMES: Well, you
know, speaking for myself, I see
pictures
that are literally gruesome
beyond belief,
that are hard to process
mentally, and they
are painful and compelling in
one way.
But this picture resonated in
some ways because
it's easier to connect to, it's
a child in
distress.
So many of the -- it's almost
ineffortable
to explain why but some of the
gestures he
made could easily remind you of
a child you've
known.
Some of the -- you know, his
clothing, he
was wearing a shirt with a
Nickelodeon character
on it.
I think it's like with Alan
Kurdi, who's body
was -- he was dead but his body
was intact
and it reminded people, you
know, of a child
sleeping on a beach.
And I think in a way that's more
shareable
in a social media age than a
really gruesome
picture of death.
SREENIVASAN: Susan, why did this
picture pop?
Why did it get around the world
in 20 seconds?
SUSAN MOELLER, INTERNATIONAL
CENTER FOR MEDIA
AND THE PUBLIC AGENDA: I think
one of the
reasons is because the child is
looking at
us.
But with a blank stare, where
often we see
on the news and we see in relief
aid agency
But with a blank stare, where
often we see
on the news and we see in relief
aid agency
comment that, you know, help
this child, and
the child is looking at us, and
it almost
seems like the child is asking
us to do something.
And Omran was also that same
pleading character.
SREENIVASAN: So, Anne, what
impacts do these
images have the potential to
yield?
BARNARD: Well, you know, that's
a mixed bag.
We can certainly think of
examples in history
like the famous picture of the
girl burned
by napalm by the U.S. military
in Vietnam,
that arguably changed public
opinion and maybe
moved policy ultimately.
I think, on the other hand, many
images go
viral or touch people for a
moment and then
people move on.
So, I think, certainly, among
Syrians on all
sides of the conflict, there is
an increasing
mix of anger that comes up when
people express
sympathy about an image like
this because
it's, like, well, really?
You only just notice now that
this is happening
after five years?
And it happened enough times
without anything
changing that people's
expectations are really
low.
SREENIVASAN: Susan, is it a
potential for
a government policy shift or
people moved
on a certain level?
MOELLER: As Anne suggests that
normally government
policy doesn't shift with
images.
There may be rhetoric, there may
be a press
conference held, there maybe
sympathy expressed,
but you don't typically get
change.
What you do get is attention,
and with enough
attention, then you may get
reaction that
has an effect.
SREENIVASAN: Anne, are people
motivated to
take action?
Are there cases where it might
not be a government
policy shift but individuals
mobilize to such
an extent that there is
impactful change?
BARNARD: Well, I certainly have
had many people
ask me, how can I help people
like this?
What organizations are doing
work that can
help civilians caught in this
conflict?
Other advocacy groups are
jumping on this
to say, well, this is -- enough
is enough,
it's time to take more robust
action to stop
these air strikes by the
Russians and the
Syrian government.
Others are, you know, saying,
well, there
is not an easy answer.
Some people don't find this a
reason to change
U.S. policy.
So, it depends on the person.
Some reactions are political,
some are more
humanitarian, but I do think a
lot of people
felt it like a punch in the gut,
even I did
after all this time covering the
conflict.
SREENIVASAN: Susan, what are
people left to
do about it?
Is writing a check the answer?
I mean, there is a sense of
helplessness when
you see this image, too.
MOELLER: Yes, I think Omran has
become, you
know, the current poster child
for Syria for
this moment in time, just like
Alan Kurdi
did a year ago, and we've had
other small
children do in years' past.
And I think a poster child does
help us reach
into our wallets, reach into our
pockets,
and give.
I wrote a book called
"Compassion Fatigue",
and in that, I suggested that
one of the reasons
why people sometimes say enough
is when they
feel helpless, is when they feel
like they
can't make a difference.
And I think, being able to
figure out how
to make a difference can be
something that
a photograph like Omran can do.
In other words, identifying an
aid agency.
Alan Kurdi, for example, in the
24 hours after
that photograph appeared, just
one refugee
agency received almost a quarter
million dollars.
So, we can say that help is
given that wouldn't
have been given otherwise.
SREENIVASAN: Anne, is there a
correlation
between things that we can do at
home, say
a Confederate flag issue or an
LGBT issue
that people get fired up about
versus things
overseas that might require the
action of
different governments and armies
and tanks
to move into places?
BARNARD: Well, I do think people
find it a
bit opaque how they can affect
foreign policy,
especially nowadays in the era
of just wars
that are going on behind the
scenes and with
drones.
And I do think, however, that,
you know, now
that there is a more active
protest movement
going on in the United States,
anything can
happen.
But again the issues are very
complex and
multi-sided.
You know, people remember that
the war in
Iraq was a huge failure and
they're wary of
the Middle East in general, they
don't know
much about it.
And I also think there is an
element that
we've seen, there is a fear of
Muslims and
an element of racism and there
is perhaps
a conflation of innocent Muslim
civilians
with a fear of terrorism that is
an obstacle
to empathy for many people.
And so, pictures like this
hopefully, whatever
your political stripe remind you
that we're
talking about just ordinary
human beings.
SREENIVASAN: Anne Barnard of
"The New York
Times" joining us from Beirut,
Susan Moeller
of the University of Maryland --
thanks for
being here.
MOELLER: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: Now, economics
correspondent Paul
Solman spends a little time with
a former
hedge fund trader turned social
entrepreneur,
someone who wants to turn the
table on food
shortages in inner cities by
launching an
array of eateries in both
high-end and lower-income
neighborhoods.
It's part of our series "Making
Sense", which
airs Thursdays on the
"NewsHour".
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT:
Sam Polk was formerly a top dog
at one of
the world's top hedge funds.
SAM POLK, SOCIAL ENTREPRENEUR:
My dad was
this sort of Willy Loman
character, this sort
of out-of-work salesman that
could never make
ends meet.
So when I was on Wall Street, my
entire life's
goal was to make more money than
the next
guy.
DORCIA WHITE-BRAKE, GROCERYSHIP
GRADUATE:
Just going to pour a little bit
of salsa inside.
It's like your own little bowl.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Wow, nice.
SOLMAN: Dorcia White-Brake is a
teacher's
aid in Los Angeles.
Three kids, no car, the nearest
supermarket
miles away.
WHITE-BRAKE: So I can have, you
know, good
healthy food that tastes good.
I have to take a bus and a
train.
POLK: When I was 27, I had been
on Wall Street
for five or six years and I was
at this club
in Las Vegas, and it was this
super-exclusive
club and there was $1,000
bottles of champagne,
and beautiful women all around.
My life finally looked like I'd
always wanted
it to look.
But I basically felt empty.
WHITE-BRAKE: So, basically, I
waited six months
for this application.
SOLMAN: Really.
WHITE-BRAKE: Yes, and I got it
and I turned
it in and then it seemed like an
eternity.
I was waiting and waiting and
finally I got
a call.
SOLMAN: Got a call to join the
Los Angeles
non-profit Groceryships Program,
started by
Sam Polk.
POLK: I started Groceryships
when I came to
understand that people are
living in food
deserts, where there's very
little produce
for sale and tons and tons of
fast food.
SOLMAN: Groceryships is a
six-month scholarship
to buy healthy groceries, learn
to cook them,
and to share.
POLK: And there's a box of
Kleenex in the
center because a lot of time is
devoted to
sharing about family, about body
issues, about
self-esteem and so, we have yet
to see a group
where you start talking about
those issues
and somebody doesn't burst into
tears.
WHITE-BRAKE: I need my box right
now, because,
I'm not kidding.
SOLMAN: Really?
Just talking about it.
WHITE-BRAKE: Yes, because just
to be able
to tell people about my food
disorder.
I let so much out in that so
circle.
Yeah, you know we went through a
lot of stuff
together.
Whatever, whatever I was going
through, my
Groceryships family went through
it with me.
SOLMAN: Groceryships is
expanding in L.A.,
but to Sam Polk it's only
prelude to his new
venture, Everytable.
He's just opened the first
outpost of what
he hopes will be a nationwide
chain of restaurants,
dishing out healthy food,
furiously fast,
and challengingly cheap.
WHITE-BRAKE: So that means in
this s neighborhood,
which is south Los Angeles where
the per capita
income is $13,000 a year, and
life expectancy
is ten years lower than more
affluent areas.
We price the meals at $4.
DAVID FOSTER, CO-FOUNDER,
EVERYTABLE: Four
bucks is a great price here
compared to fast
food, which is the predominant
option.
SOLMAN: David Foster also left a
rich career
in finance to join Sam Polk.
They're about to open a second
Everytable
in upscale downtown L.A., $8 a
meal.
FOSTER: But eight bucks is also
a great price
compared to what's available in
the healthy
fast casual space downtown.
SOLMAN: So, it's $8 versus $4
for exactly
the same food?
POLK: That's right.
It's basically making sure that
everyone can
afford healthy food.
SOLMAN: The same healthy food,
prepared in
the same central kitchen to keep
costs low,
and, here's the key innovation,
sold at higher
prices in wealthier
neighborhoods to make
up for the super-skinny margins
in poor ones.
POLK: In a world where
inequality is clearly
growing and becoming seen as
structural, we
think that this is the time for
a new business
that questions that fundamental
assumption
that prices should be the same
for everyone.
SOLMAN: This is one of the
dreams of all sellers,
right?
It's price discrimination.
You want to charge people what's
they're actually
willing to pay, as opposed to
just have one
price across the board.
FOSTER: We're not price
discriminating in
the sense of trying to make as
much money
off of each customer as
possible.
We're actually kind of doing the
opposite.
We're saying we don't need to
make much if
any money on a lot of our
customers, because
what's driving us is not just
having a successful,
viable company, but more
importantly solving
this problem that afflicts a lot
of people.
SOLMAN: Surprised that two guys
from Wall
Street are doing this?
DEBRA DIXON: Yes.
SOLMAN: Dedra Dixon's foundation
feeds the
homeless, getting leftovers from
Everytable
just one day old.
DIXON: There's not too many
places t around
in our community unfortunately
where you can
get salads, you can get these
meals.
And so, yes, that two guys from
Wall Street
can come down into south L.A.
and say there's
a need here that needs to be met
by way of
food and meet that need, I am
very surprised.
But grateful.
SOLMAN: Like other entrepreneurs
we've covered,
trying to bring good food to the
desert, in
Philadelphia, in Boston, Polk
sees the need
everywhere.
POLK: Eventually, we'd like to
see an Everytable
store in every neighborhood in
the country.
SOLMAN: Thousands?
POLK: I would say tens of
thousands.
We have over 50 investors,
including some
of the biggest venture capital
funds in the
country.
SOLMAN: Including many of their
high-flying
former colleagues.
But despite the enthusiasm for
do-good ideas
like this, people aren't exactly
leaving Wall
Street in droves for more
meaningful careers.
POLK: I think we all have inside
us both ambitions
which are things that we want
for ourself--
you know, money, power,
prestige.
And we all have aspirations to
contribute
or make the world a better
place.
It just so happens that we live
in a culture
as a whole where ambitions are
celebrated
more than aspirations and it's
almost like
Wall Street is the most
distilled part of
that culture.
SOLMAN: And like any culture, it
reinforces
its norms in casual
conversation.
You know, what is your net
worth?
How many sticks have you made
this year?
POLK: How many sticks?
SOLMAN: You call a million
dollars a stick
on Wall Street.
POLK: So, you say: I'm up ten
sticks to say
I have ten million in profits
this year.
My bonus in my last year on Wall
Street was
more than my mom, a nurse
practitioner midwife
had made for her entire life.
And I was 30 years old.
SOLMAN: It had taken three years
after the
emptiness epiphany in the Vegas
nightclub,
but at 30, as he explained in
for "The Love
of Money", a "New York Times"
op-ed piece
that went viral and has now been
turned into
a book.
POLK: I came to understand that
even though
that billionaire siren song was
really attractive,
that in another way, that came
to seem like
a good way to waste your life.
You go to Wall Street and you
make all this
money and then you're 70 years
old and you're
on your deathbed and --
SOLMAN: Hey, wait a second- -
not 70 on your
deathbed.
How about upping that number
just a bit?
POLK: Ninety on your deathbed.
But at the end of the day, I
felt like I wanted
to be truly proud of what I'd
done with my
life.
SOLMAN: As for David Foster --
FOSTER: There are a lot of smart
people working
in finance, and I'd go as far as
to say that
there are too many smart people
working in
finance and that thee value I
was adding versus
a replacement player was kind of
negligible.
I thought that there was
something out there
in the world, a bigger problem
that needed
solving, beyond being another
person working
in the private equity industry.
SOLMAN: Or another chef cooking
for the one
percent.
CRAIG HOPSON, EXECUTIVE CHIEF,
LE CIRQUE IN
NEW YORK: Hi, I'm Craig Hopson.
I'm executive chef here at Le
Cirque in New
York.
SOLMAN: Hopson went from haute
cuisine to
Everytable.
HOPSON: It could be thousands of
people a
day that buy the Everytable
meals.
So, I mean the audience is
unlimited.
Le Cirque, not so much.
SOLMAN: And Hopson too speaks in
sound bites
that would sound hokey if they
weren't so
obviously earnest.
HOPSON: It's great to be able to
be proud
of what I'm doing and be able to
give back
to the people that really need
it and to make
a difference in the world.
SOLMAN: And speaking of hokey
lines, make
a difference they do.
WHITE-BRAKE: Bon appetit.
SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent Paul
Solman, putting on the pounds,
healthfully,
in south Los Angeles.
That's really nice.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: Now to another of
our "Brief
But Spectacular" episodes.
Tonight, we hear from David
Remnick, editor
of "The New Yorker."
He describes how the magazine
has changed
over the years.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DAVID REMNICK, EDITOR, THE NEW
YORKER: I think
people's awareness has to begin
at some point,
some weird influence that gets
them going
that makes them enter the world.
For me, it was listening to Bob
Dylan.
I bought my first album.
It was called "The Best of '66,"
and it had
a song called "I Want You" by
Bob Dylan.
I was six years old.
I didn't know what he wanted
exactly but it
resonated with me.
You guys are fancy, I got to
tell you.
I have been the editor of "The
New Yorker"
magazine since 1998 and I've
been a writer
here since 1992.
It's changed from being the
editor of a weekly
print magazine to now a web
site, radio show,
a television show, floor wax,
dessert topping,
we're everything.
"The New Yorker Radio Hour" is a
program that's
both on terrestrial radio and a
podcast.
Now podcast and radio is
renaissance, just
as television is in many ways.
And if "The New Yorker Radio
Hour" is in the
thick of that renaissance, I'm
very happy.
Editing is a really complicated
process.
Get the writer to do the best
form of the
writer's version of the piece.
An editor who is obnoxious, in
my mind, is
the kind of editor that said
winkingly, that's
kind of my piece.
That's just not what's done
here.
The greatest feeling of
satisfaction is to
run across somebody young who
has something
new to say and saying it in a
different way
and help that person in some
subtle way get
to be himself or herself, that
is thrilling.
Not everybody does everything at
the highest
level.
I don't expect an investigative
report to
necessarily be the next sense
and sensibility.
What you want is to be accurate
and deep and
clear.
My editor up in New York, when I
write, the
rare times that I write is a guy
named Henry
Fender (ph).
He might say something like this
-- very good
things here -- and if that
happens, I know
we're in for a long ride.
Everybody does his or her job in
a moment
in time.
My moment in time is not only to
make the
magazine as great as it possibly
can be but
help us cross this technological
and even
financial roaring river of
change.
The Internet is at the center of
everybody's
attention and how we come into
people's households
or palms or field division has
changed radically
and I have to leave a "New
Yorker" that's
got its soul as well as its
technological
act together.
I'm David Remnick and this is my
"Brief but
Spectacular" view of "The New
Yorker."
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: You can watch
additional "Brief
But Spectacular" episodes at
pbs.org/newshour/brief.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online, and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
Jennifer Rubin.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour", thank
you and good night.